title: JSON Views
date: April 13, 2016  
description: Learn about Grails Framework® convention-based content negotiation.
author: Jeff Scott Brown
image: 2016-04-13.jpg
CSS: [%url]/stylesheets/prism.css
JAVASCRIPT: [%url]/javascripts/prism.js
---

# [%title]

[%author]

[%date] 

Tags: #json #rest

We recently published another Grails<sup>&reg;</sup> Quickcast, brought to you in collaboration with DZone. In case you missed the first episode on Grails 3 Interceptors, you can view it [here](https://objectcomputing.com/products/grails/resources/quickcasts/grails-interceptors).

The latest episode introduces JSON Views, a really simple yet powerful tool supported by Grails 3 for describing the JSON response formats for REST APIs. The video is available [here](https://objectcomputing.com/products/grails/resources/quickcasts/json-views).

Another powerful feature supported by the tool is convention-based content negotiation. 

Consider a simple domain class.

```groovy
package demo

import grails.rest.Resource

@Resource(uri='/books', formats=['json'])
class Book {
    String title
    String author
}
```

A simple JSON view for that domain class might look like this.

```groovy
// grails-app/views/book/_book.gson
import demo.Book

model {
	Book book
}

json {
   bookTitle book.title
   bookAuthor book.author
}
```

When a request is made to render a Book, that view will be used by default.

```
    $ curl http://localhost:8080/books/1.json
    {"bookTitle":"Wool","bookAuthor":"Hugh Howey"}
```

Grails takes into account a number of factors when attempting to resolve the view including the content type, version and locale.

The following paths are searched:

*   view_name[_LOCALE][_ACCEPT_CONTENT_TYPE][_ACCEPT_VERSION].gson (Example: show_de_hal_v1.0.gson)
*   view_name[_LOCALE][_ACCEPT_CONTENT_TYPE].gson (Example: show_de_hal.gson)
*   view_name[_LOCALE][_ACCEPT_VERSION].gson (Example: show_de_v1.0.gson)
*   view_name[_LOCALE].gson (Example: show_de.gson)
*   view_name[_ACCEPT_CONTENT_TYPE][_ACCEPT_VERSION].gson (Example: show_hal_v1.0.gson)
*   view_name[_ACCEPT_VERSION][_ACCEPT_CONTENT_TYPE].gson (Example: show_v1.0_hal.gson)
*   view_name[_ACCEPT_CONTENT_TYPE].gson (Example: show_hal.gson)
*   view_name[_ACCEPT_VERSION].gson (Example: show_v1.0.gson)
*   view_name.gson (Example: show.gson)

The content type (defined by either the `ACCEPT` header or file extension in the URI) is taken into account to allow different formats for the same view.

For more detail, see [the official documentation](http://grails.github.io/grails-views/latest/).
