title: Running a Grails® 3 App With a Self-Signed SSL Certificate
date: June 28, 2017
description: Learn the steps involved in generating and configuring a self-signed certificate with your Grails app.
author: Zachary Klein
image: 2017-06-28.jpg
---

# [%title]

[%author]

[%date]

Tags: #ssl #deployment

The [Grails<sup>&reg;</sup> _run-app_ command documentation](https://docs.grails.org/latest/ref/Command%20Line/run-app.html) describes how to use the _-https_ flag to serve your app over HTTPS.

> https - Start an HTTPS server (on port 8443 by default) alongside the main server. Just to be clear, the application will be accessible via HTTPS and HTTP. A self-signed key will be generated. Intended for development use only.

If you run the following command:

````
grails run-app -https // with HTTPS
````

Your app will be served at _https://localhost:8443_

However, as stated in the documentation, the _https_ flag is intended for development use only. In real-world applications, an SSL certificate from a [Certificate Authority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_authority), would be used to verify your application's identity with clients. However, it is also possible to generate a self-signed certificate for testing purposes. A self-signed certificate doesn't provide the identity protection that a CA offers, but the steps involved in configuring a self-signed certificate with your Grails app will be largely the same with a CA certificate.

## Generate Your Self-Signed SSL Certificate

You can generate a self-signed certificate using the [`openssl`](https://www.openssl.org/) command-line utility. This is installed by default on most Unix-based OS's, and can be installed on [Windows](https://sourceforge.net/projects/openssl-for-windows/) as well.

We can use `openssl`'s `req` command to create a self-signed certificate:

`openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:4096 -keyout key.pem -out cert.pem -days 365`

We're using several command options:

- **x509** This option outputs a self-signed certificate instead of a certificate request.
- **newkey** This option creates a new certificate request and a new private key. `rsa:nbits`, where `nbits` is the number of bits, generates an RSA key nbits in size.
- **keyout** This specifies the filename for the the newly created private key.
- **out** This specifies the output filename to write the certificate
- **days** When used with the `-x509` option, `days` specifies the number of days to certify the certificate for. The default is 30.

You can learn about other `req` options by running `man req`

The previous command will prompt you to supply metadata about the certificate, such as Country, Organization, etc. Moreover, it will ask you to provide a PEM pass phrase. Enter a random password and keep it safe; we will need in the next step.

Now you have you self-signed certificate. Unfortunately the Grails framework (and Spring Boot) doesn’t support the PEM format directly. Instead, we need to use the PKCS12 format for our keys. Fortunately, there is another `openssl` command to make the conversion:

`openssl pkcs12 -export -in cert.pem -inkey key.pem -out keystore.p12 -name tomcat -caname root`

Again, we're using a few options:

- **export** This option specifies that a PKCS#12 file will be created rather than parsed.
- **name**  This specifies the certificate entry for the certificate and private key. When we edit our `application.yml` file, we will use this name as the `keyAlias`
- **in** This specifies filename of the PKCS#12 file to be parsed.
- **inkey** File from which to read the private key.
- **caname** This specifies the "friendly name" for other certificates

You can learn more about the `pkcs121` command by running `man pks12`

## Modify Grails Configuration to Use the Certificate

Update `grails-app/conf/application.yml` with the following lines:

```
server:
    port: 8443
    ssl:
        keyStore: /certificates/keystore.p12
        keyStorePassword: secret
        keyAlias: tomcat
```

You can read more about pkcs121 by running `man pks12`

## Using Java KeyStores

If you are deploying your app to a container like Tomcat, you will need to use a [Java KeyStore (JKS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keystore) to store your SSL certificate. We can use the [`keytool`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/windows/keytool.html) command-line utility (provided by Java) to create a JKS from our PKCS#12 keystore.

Use the `importkeystore` command to import and create the new keystore:

```
keytool -importkeystore -srckeystore keystore.p12 -srcstoretype pkcs12 -srcalias tomcat -destkeystore keystore.jks -deststoretype jks -deststorepass secret -destalias tomcat
```

- **srckeystore** Source keystore (in our case, `keystore.p12`)
- **srcstoretype** Source keystore type
- **srcalias** Certificate entry in the source keystore (in our case, "tomcat")
- **destkeystore** File name for the JKS
- **deststoretype** Keystore type (JKS)
- **deststorepass** Password for the JKS
- **destalias** Certificate entry in the JKS

Now we can update our `application.yml` to use the JKS file instead of the PKCS#12 keystore.

```
server:
    port: 8443
    ssl:
        enabled: true
        keyStore: /certificates/keystore.jks
        keyStorePassword: secret
        keyAlias: tomcat
```

## Example:

[Github Repository with a Grails sample application](https://github.com/grails-samples/grails-ssl)
