title: Webinar: Single-Page Apps Simplified with the Grails® framework and Vue.js
date: May 24, 2019  
description: Watch this 1-hour, on-demand webinar to learn how to boost your productivity when building single-page applications (SPAs) by combining the dynamic functionality of the Grails® framework with a front-end powered by the Vue.js library.
author: Zachary Klein
image: 2019-05-24.jpg
video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eSNYhZeTmWg
slides: https://objectcomputing.com/files/4215/5872/4980/Slide_Deck_SPAs_with_Grails_and_Vue_Webinar.pdf  
---

# [%title]

[%author]

[%date] 

Tags: #webinar

Vue.js is a modern, pragmatic JavaScript library designed for building user interfaces. Vue borrows good ideas from React and Angular, then adds a slew of features to enhance developer experience and productivity. Interest in Vue is through the roof, and for good reason.  

The Grails<sup>&reg;</sup> framework includes a Vue profile for building applications with a Vue front-end. In addition, the Grails framework offers several features that make it an ideal back-end framework for single-page apps (SPAs), including JSON views and JWT authentication with the Spring Security REST plugin.

In this webinar, 2GM (Groovy, Grails framework, and Micronaut) team member, [Zachary Klein](https://objectcomputing.com/products/2gm-team#klein-z), introduces the Vue.js library and walks you through a Grails project using Vue, REST, and JWT security. He completes the demonstration by demonstrating the steps necessary to build an executable JAR file with the Grails framework and Vue.

## Outline

The following topics are covered in this webinar:

- Introduction to Vue.js
- Overview of the Vue profile for the Grails framework
- Overview of Spring Security REST with JWT
- Demonstration of how to implement JWT security with the Grails framework and Vue
- Demonstration of a sample project using the Grails framework and Vue
- Demonstration of an executable JAR build with Gradle

This is a great opportunity for Grails developers to add a new skill to their coding toolboxes! General web and JVM developers are also encouraged to discover what the Grails framework has to offer modern web development practices.
