---
title: Grails Framework and Log4j 2 Vulnerability
date: Dec 14, 2021
description: Most applications are not affected since the Grails framework uses Logback by default.
author: Sergio del Amo
image: 2019-12-20.jpg
---

# [%title]

[%author]

[%date]


Vulnerability [CVE-2021-44228](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2021-44228) may allow an attacker to remotely execute code. It affects [Log4j](https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/)'s `log4j-core` jar. Log4j [v2.15.0](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/org/apache/logging/log4j/log4j-core/2.15.0/) fixes it. Moreover, Log4j [v2.16.0](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/org/apache/logging/log4j/log4j-core/2.16.0/) disables JNDI functionality by default, and it removes message lookups.

## Are Grails 2 applications vulnerable?

CVE-2021-44228 only affects log4j versions between 2.0 and 2.14.1. Grails 2 applications used Log4j 1.x. However, you should consider migrating as soon as possible to the latest version of the Grails framework. Grails 2 is EOL (End of Life).  

## Are Grails applications (3, 4, or 5) vulnerable?

Starting with Grails 3.0.0, Grails applications have used [Logback](http://logback.qos.ch). Thus, **most Grails applications are not affected**.

However, your application might be vulnerable if it includes untrusted input in the log messages and pulls `log4j-core` as a transitive dependency through some other library or a plugin.

## The "tomcat-embed-logging-log4j" dependency

You might have noticed that there is a tomcat-embed-logging-log4j dependency in the classpath. We believe it is not affected by the vulnerability because:

1. The JAR does not contain org/apache/logging/log4j/core/lookup/JndiLookup.class.
2. The [POM](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/org/apache/tomcat/embed/tomcat-embed-logging-log4j/8.5.2/tomcat-embed-logging-log4j-8.5.2.pom) does not mention any dependencies.

## How can you check to see if you are pulling `log4j-core` as a transitive dependency?

If you are using Gradle, the following command will return a dependency report for 'log4j-core' dependency:

```
./gradlew dependencyInsight --dependency log4j-core
```

For Grails 2 applications, use: 

```
./grailsw dependencyReport
```

## How do you tell your build to use a particular version of Log4j?

With Gradle, if your application is pulling `log4j-core` transitively, you can declare a `resolutionStrategy`:

```groovy
configurations.all {
  resolutionStrategy.eachDependency { DependencyResolveDetails details -&gt;
    if (details.requested.group == 'org.apache.logging.log4j') {
      details.useVersion '2.16.0'
    }
  }
}
```

## Other Options

If you cannot upgrade, please do the following, as [suggested by the Log4j team](https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/):

> For those who cannot upgrade to 2.15.0, in releases &gt;=2.10, this behavior can be mitigated by setting either the system property `log4j2.formatMsgNoLookups` or the environment variable `LOG4J_FORMAT_MSG_NO_LOOKUPS` to `true`.
> For releases &gt;=2.7 and &lt;=2.14.1, all `PatternLayoutpatterns` can be modified to specify the message converter as `%m{nolookups}` instead of just `%m`.
> For releases &gt;=2.0-beta9 and &lt;=2.10.0, the mitigation is to remove the `JndiLookup` class from the classpath: `zip -q -d log4j-core-*.jar org/apache/logging/log4j/core/lookup/JndiLookup.class`.

## Learn More

Since Grails 3.0.0, Grails applications have been Spring Boot applications. Learn more about [Log4j 2 vulnerability and Spring Boot](https://spring.io/blog/2021/12/10/log4j2-vulnerability-and-spring-boot) in the Spring blog. 
